+++
title = "Using the Conditional Operator"
+++

The conditional operator is the only ternary operator in Zen.
It is used to replace certain types of if-then-else statements.
You will learn more about if statements later in the manual.

The conditional operator is represented by a question mark (?). 
It can seem somewhat confusing at first, but the conditional operator
can be used very effectively once understood.

The conditional operator has the following general form.
````
expression1 ? expression2 : expression3
```

Here, `expression1` can be any expression that evaluates to a boolean value.
If expression1 is true, then expression2 is evaluated; otherwise, expression3
is evaluated.

The result of the conditional operator is that of the expression evaluated.
Both `expression2` and `expression3` are required to return the same type.

In Zen, you cannot use 0 as denominator in integer division.

Here, is an example which prevents division by 0 using the conditional operator.
```
result = (denominator == 0) ? 0 : numerator / denominator
```

When Zen evaluates this assignment expression, it first evaluates the expression
in the parenthesis, which is not really necessary. In other words, the expression
to the left of the question mark is first evaluated. If the denominator equals
to zero, then the expression between the question mark and
the colon is evaluated and used as the value of the entire conditional
expression. If denominator is not equal to zero, then the expression after the colon
is evaluated and used for the value of the entire conditional expression. The result
produced by the conditional operator is then assigned to result.

Here is a program that demonstrates the conditional operator. It uses it to obtain the
absolute value of a variable.

```
// ConditionalOperatorExample.zen

function main(...arguments)
    var i = 10
    var k = i < 0? -i : i
    print('Absolute value of i is ' + k)

    i = -7
    k = i < 0 ? -i : i
    print('Absolute value of i is ' + k)
```

The output generated by the program is shown here.
```
Absolute value of 10 is 10
Absolute value of -7 is 7
```